CharacterCreation.md, before:

# Character Creation
**Valid Resources/Books:** Core Rulebook, Advaned Players Guide, Ultimate Combat, Ultimate Magic. Ultimate Race Guide for enhancing core races. Ask about any other resource.

## Steps
0. Choose a Concept
1. Character Sheet
2. Class
3. Race
4. Alignment
5. Ability Scores
6. Traits
7. Skills
8. Feats
9. Starting HP
10. Starting Gold and Equipment
11. Movement, Saves, Initiative, Attack Bonuses, Other Details

## 1) Choose A Concept
Determine what the concept of the character is. Who are you and what do you want to do?

## 2) Character Sheets
Try out [Character Sheets by Dyslexic Studeos](http://charactersheets.minotaur.cc/). It does print with multiple pages, but has additional detail and per-class page that spells out when abilities are available. Spellcasters will find this especially useful.

## 3) Classes
**Allowed Classes:** All Core and Base classes are allowed, unless specified. Vigilante and Gunsligher are not allowed. There will be no firearms in this setting.

**Favored Class and Favored Class Bonus:** Everyone gets a favored class (half-elves get two). This is set at character creation. When gaining a level in a favored class (including first level), the character gains an additional hitpoint or skill point. Each race has an alternate bonus based on the class.

## 4) Races
All Core races are valid, of course. Humans, gnomes, and dwarves are common throughout the Land of the Linnorm Kings. There are no native elves to the Linnorm Kingdoms. Half-orcs and half-elves are uncommon, except for the half-orc settlement of Averaka in the Ironbound Isles. Halflings are even less common than the half-races, at least outside of the major cities and settlements.

There are relationships between the races, some good and others not so much. Dwarves have hated orcs since their time of reaching for the sky, so half-orcs and dwarves only barely get along. Dwarves really hate giants, be it a historical incident between their peoples or just dwarves having a strong short-complex. Half-orcs and half-elves don't fit into their parents' cultures and tend to be seen as outsiders because of this. Gnomes are known to be quite eccentric, especially with their vibrant colored hair and insatiable need for new experiences that often gets them into trouble. Halflings are known as troublemakers and trickers by other races who just don't appreciate their sense of humor and opportunistic nature. The shorter-lived races see elves are too slow to move and act while elves see the shorter-lived as too capricious and volatile.

Inherently good or evil races may have difficulty being accepted culturally. Races of the Underdark, such as the Daergar or Drow, are especially unliked and will have difficulty with the powers that be in the kingdom. If you want to play a race that will have to deal with this strife, talk with me prior to make sure it won't cause conflicts for the table, story, or setting.

## 5) Alignment
No requirements. Full spectrum is allowed. Chaotic characters, especially from other regions, will find it easier to handle the people and cultures present in the campaign. Extremely good or extremely evil will not work in this setting. Please do not create a character that is the moral compass for the party. Strife due to alignment differences is fine though and sometimes part of the fun.

## 6) Ability Scores
We will be using point buy to give everyone the same amount of power potential. Use this [Point Buy Calculator](http://www.jody-white.com/pathfinder-ability-score-calculator.php), select 25 points (Epic Fantasy). Dumping an ability (lowering it below 10) is fine, within reason. This gives more points to buy up other skills.

- Strength (STR) - Raw strength. Melee to hit and damage. How much can be carried.
- Dexterity (DEX) - Finesse and agility. Ranged and ranged touch to hit. Affects AC, touch AC, and reflex save.
- Consitituion (CON) - Physical health and resilience. Affects HP and fortititude (FORT) save.
- Intelligence (INT) - Raw intelligence. Additional skills and languages. Some spellcasters.
- Wisdom (WIS) - Mental health and resilience. Some spellcasters. Affects will save.
- Charisma (CHA) - Force of personality. Some spellcasters.

## 7) Traits
Everyone gets two charater [traits](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/traits). These other traits cannot be from the same category (magic, social, etc). Optionally, you can take a single [drawback](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/traits/drawbacks) to get another trait.

## 8) Skills
The number of ranks in a skill is limited by your total class level. Only one rank in any skill at first level.

Everyone starts with a rank in a single [Profession](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/skills/profession), this is an extra skill rank earned during character creation for free. This represents the profession that your character has that learns them a honest living and might provide an insight bonus when doing other actions, such as a miner might know something about a caves structure and signs it has been worked. Example professions: architect, baker, barrister, brewer, butcher, clerk, cook, courtesan, driver, engineer, farmer, fisherman, gambler, gardener, herbalist, innkeeper, librarian, merchant, midwife, miller, miner, porter, sailor, scribe, shepherd, stable master, soldier, tanner, trapper, and woodcutter.

Don't forget class skills that have at least one rank in it have an extra bonus +3 (this is shown as a separate column on the Dyslexic Studeos character sheet).

## 9) Feats
Everyone starts with an extra bonus feat.

## 10) Starting HP
Maximum HP at first level. So a wizard with a d6 gets 6 + CON modifier.
Minimum lower half on HD roll every level after. Example: Roll 1d6, minimum result 3.

## 11) Starting Gold and Equipment
Set average for starting class. Example: Sorcerer gets 70gp, Cleric gets 140gp. This is available in the Corebook as well as on [d20pfsrd, section 8](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/basics-ability-scores/character-creation).

## 12) Movement, Saves, Initiative, Attack Bonuses, Other Details
Fill in the respective statistics.

### Movement
Medium characters usually move 30 ft while small characters move 20 ft. This is defined by your race (Dwarf is medium yet 20ft movement). Usually no climb, fly, or swim speeds.

### Saves
Saves combine your natural ability (ability score modifiers) and your class's training.
- Fort Save = Base + CON modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits
- Reflex Save = Base + DEX modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits
- Will Save = Base + WIS modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits

#### Melee
- To Hit: (STR + Base Attack Bonus) + Feats + Weapon Qualities
- Damage: STR + Weapon + Feats + Weapon Qualities
    - Feats such as Power Attack add additional damage.
    - Weapon Qualities is masterwork (to hit), magic
    - Two-handed weapons deal 1.5 x STR, rounded down. STR +3 means 3+1=4 while +4 means 4+2=6

### Ranged
- To Hit: (DEX + Base Attack Bonus) + Feats + Weapon Qualities
- Damage: Weapon + Feats + Weapon Qualities
    - Feats such as Point Blank Shot add additional damage.
    - Weapon Qualities is masterwork (to hit), magic, composite
    - Composite longbows have a strength quality that add additional damage.

### Other Details
Age, height, and weight are defined by your race. For your race, there is an adulthood age chart based on the class type (Intuitive, Self-Taught, Trained) that should give an idea of what age is appropriate for the race/class combination.

# Reminders!
- Ability modifiers only change on even ability scores. Modifier = (Score - 10) / 2, Round Down. 16 => 3, 15 = 2, 9 => -1, 8 => -1
- At 4th-level and every 4 after that (8th, 12th, etc), any ability score can be increased by a single value (16 => 17). This is a permament increase and doesn't need to apply to the same ability score every time.
- There exists magical spells and equipment that can boost ability scores, such as Bull's Strength and Belt of Giant Strength for Strength respectively.
- Spellcasters linked ability score must be at least 10 higher than the spell to cast it. Example: A wizard needs an INT score of 16 to cast a 6th-level spell. An INT score of 15 or less means the wizard cannot cast 6th-level or higher spells. Take this into account when assigning ability scores.
    - Intelligence (INT) for Wizards, Magus, Witch, Alchemist
    - Wisdom (WIS) for Cleric, Druid, Ranger, Inquisitor
    - Charisma (CHA) for Sorcerer, Bard, Paladin, Oracle, Summoner, Cleric's channels/day

# A Note on Munchkining and Table Etiquette
**Munchkining:** I have no concerns with creating optimized characters, but if something is ruining the table environment or the fun of others, a change may be necessary. I do not want to wipe out a character build or make them no longer any fun to play, just want to make the environment the most fun it can be. As long as it does not break the game or cause table strife, I will likely be up for it. Thus if something feels broken, it is likely best to not use it.

**Table Etiquette:**
- Please keep relevant documentation at hand , especially spellcasters. There are decent apps/tools out there for managing spellbooks. Spellcard generators and other tools are available on [d20pfsrd](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/magic/tools) for making physical references. [Pathfinder Spellbook](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ChicaneryGames.PathfindersSpellbook&hl=en) is a decent reference tool on Android, if a bit old (2011).
- Please pay attention. I want to avoid repeating something if possible as well as keep combat moving. In combat, you can always go On Hold and come back in at a later time.
- Ask questions about how a mechanic or such works, especially if it is complex, and we will work through how to make it work. Example: How does this spell and can it do this? Flanking? Movement restrictions?

Commit message:

Improving the character creation summary, clearing up Ultimate Equipment usage.

CharacterCreation.md, after:

# Character Creation
**Valid Resources/Books:** Core Rulebook (CRB), Advaned Players Guide (APG), Ultimate Combat (UC), Ultimate Magic (UM), and Ultimate Equipment (UE). Ultimate Race Guide for enhancing core races for alternate racial abilities, racial traits, or racial feats. Ask about any other resource.

## Steps
0. Choose a Concept
1. Character Sheet
2. Class
3. Race
4. Alignment
5. Ability Scores
6. Traits
7. Skills
8. Feats
9. Starting HP
10. Starting Gold and Equipment
11. Movement, Saves, Initiative, Attack Bonuses, Other Details

## 1) Choose A Concept
Determine what the concept of the character is. Who are you and what do you want to do?

## 2) Character Sheets
Try out [Character Sheets by Dyslexic Studeos](http://charactersheets.minotaur.cc/). It does print with multiple pages, but has additional detail and per-class page that spells out when abilities are available. Spellcasters will find this especially useful.

## 3) Classes
Fill in your class abilities at a later step, just before adding traits. This will 

**Allowed Classes:** All Core and Base classes are allowed, unless specified. Vigilante and Gunsligher are not allowed. There will be no firearms in this setting.

**Favored Class and Favored Class Bonus:** Everyone gets a favored class (half-elves get two). This is set at character creation. When gaining a level in a favored class (including first level), the character gains an additional hitpoint or skill point. Each race has an alternate bonus based on the class.

## 4) Races
Pick a race that makes sense for the concept of the character and meshes well with the class.

All Core races are valid, of course. Humans, gnomes, and dwarves are common throughout the Land of the Linnorm Kings. There are no native elves to the Linnorm Kingdoms. Half-orcs and half-elves are uncommon, except for the half-orc settlement of Averaka in the Ironbound Isles. Halflings are even less common than the half-races, at least outside of the major cities and settlements.

There are relationships between the races, some good and others not so much. Dwarves have hated orcs since their time of reaching for the sky, so half-orcs and dwarves only barely get along. Dwarves really hate giants, be it a historical incident between their peoples or just dwarves having a strong short-complex. Half-orcs and half-elves don't fit into their parents' cultures and tend to be seen as outsiders because of this. Gnomes are known to be quite eccentric, especially with their vibrant colored hair and insatiable need for new experiences that often gets them into trouble. Halflings are known as troublemakers and trickers by other races who just don't appreciate their sense of humor and opportunistic nature. The shorter-lived races see elves are too slow to move and act while elves see the shorter-lived as too capricious and volatile.

Inherently good or evil races may have difficulty being accepted culturally. Races of the Underdark, such as the Daergar or Drow, are especially unliked and will have difficulty with the powers that be in the kingdom. If you want to play a race that will have to deal with this strife, talk with me prior to make sure it won't cause conflicts for the table, story, or setting.

## 5) Alignment
Pick an alignment that makes sense for the concept and matches what the class allows.

No requirements. Full spectrum is allowed. Chaotic characters, especially from other regions, will find it easier to handle the people and cultures present in the campaign. Extremely good or extremely evil will not work in this setting. Please do not create a character that is the moral compass for the party. Strife due to alignment differences is fine though and sometimes part of the fun.

## 6) Ability Scores
We will be using point buy to give everyone the same amount of power potential. Use this [Point Buy Calculator](http://www.jody-white.com/pathfinder-ability-score-calculator.php), select 25 points (Epic Fantasy). Dumping an ability (lowering it below 10) is fine, within reason, and the lowest possible score is 7. This gives more points to buy up other skills.

- Strength (STR) - Raw strength. Melee to hit and damage. How much can be carried.
- Dexterity (DEX) - Finesse and agility. Ranged and ranged touch to hit. Affects AC, touch AC, and reflex save.
- Consitituion (CON) - Physical health and resilience. Affects HP and fortititude (FORT) save.
- Intelligence (INT) - Raw intelligence. Additional skills and languages. Some spellcasters.
- Wisdom (WIS) - Mental health and resilience. Some spellcasters. Affects will save.
- Charisma (CHA) - Force of personality. Some spellcasters.

Stated another way...
- Strength is being able to crush a tomato.
- Dexterity is being able to dodge a tomato.
- Consitituion is being able to eat a bad tomato.
- Intelligence is knowing a tomato is a fruit.
- Wisdom is knowing not to put a tomato in a fruit salad.
- Charisma is being able to sell a tomato based fruit salad.

[A tomato based fruit salad would simply be salsa.](https://www.reddit.com/r/DnD/comments/1s9l2g/dd_stats_explained_with_tomatoes/cdvbace)

## **Now** fill in your class abilities! Spells, skill bonuses, etc.

## 7) Traits
Everyone gets two charater [traits](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/traits). These other traits cannot be from the same category (magic, social, etc). Optionally, you can take a single [drawback](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/traits/drawbacks) to get another trait.

## 8) Skills
The number of ranks in a skill is limited by your total class level. Only one rank in any skill at first level.

Everyone starts with a rank in a single [Profession](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/skills/profession), this is an extra skill rank earned during character creation for free. This represents the profession that your character has that learns them a honest living and might provide an insight bonus when doing other actions, such as a miner might know something about a caves structure and signs it has been worked. Example professions: architect, baker, barrister, brewer, butcher, clerk, cook, courtesan, driver, engineer, farmer, fisherman, gambler, gardener, herbalist, innkeeper, librarian, merchant, midwife, miller, miner, porter, sailor, scribe, shepherd, stable master, soldier, tanner, trapper, and woodcutter.

Don't forget class skills that have at least one rank in it have an extra bonus +3 (this is shown as a separate column on the Dyslexic Studeos character sheet).

## 9) Feats
Everyone starts with an extra bonus feat.

[d20pfsrd Feat Tree](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/feats/feat-tree) is useful for most feat selection.

## 10) Starting HP
Maximum HP at first level. So a wizard with a d6 gets 6 + CON modifier.
Minimum lower half on HD roll every level after. Example: Roll 1d6, minimum result 3.

## 11) Starting Gold and Equipment
Set average for starting class. Example: Sorcerer gets 70gp, Cleric gets 140gp. This is available in the Corebook as well as on [d20pfsrd, section 8](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/basics-ability-scores/character-creation).

Much of the equipment on d20pfsrd will be listed as under Ultimate Equipment or UE, this is all valid equipment.

## 12) Movement, Saves, Initiative, Attack Bonuses, Other Details
Fill in the respective statistics.

### Movement
Medium characters usually move 30 ft while small characters move 20 ft. This is defined by your race (Dwarf is medium yet 20ft movement). Usually no climb, fly, or swim speeds.

### Saves
Saves combine your natural ability (ability score modifiers) and your class's training.
- Fort Save = Base + CON modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits
- Reflex Save = Base + DEX modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits
- Will Save = Base + WIS modifier + Equipment + Misc/Traits

#### Melee
- To Hit: (STR + Base Attack Bonus) + Feats + Weapon Qualities
- Damage: STR + Weapon + Feats + Weapon Qualities
    - Feats such as Power Attack add additional damage.
    - Weapon Qualities is masterwork (to hit), magic
    - Two-handed weapons deal 1.5 x STR, rounded down. STR +3 means 3+1=4 while +4 means 4+2=6

### Ranged
- To Hit: (DEX + Base Attack Bonus) + Feats + Weapon Qualities
- Damage: Weapon + Feats + Weapon Qualities
    - Feats such as Point Blank Shot add additional damage.
    - Weapon Qualities is masterwork (to hit), magic, composite
    - Composite longbows have a strength quality that add additional damage.

### Other Details
Age, height, and weight are defined by your race. For your race, there is an adulthood age chart based on the class type (Intuitive, Self-Taught, Trained) that should give an idea of what age is appropriate for the race/class combination.

# Reminders!
- Ability modifiers only change on even ability scores. Modifier = (Score - 10) / 2, Round Down. 16 => 3, 15 = 2, 9 => -1, 8 => -1
- At 4th-level and every 4 after that (8th, 12th, etc), any ability score can be increased by a single value (16 => 17). This is a permament increase and doesn't need to apply to the same ability score every time.
- There exists magical spells and equipment that can boost ability scores, such as Bull's Strength and Belt of Giant Strength for Strength respectively.
- Spellcasters linked ability score must be at least 10 higher than the spell to cast it. Example: A wizard needs an INT score of 16 to cast a 6th-level spell. An INT score of 15 or less means the wizard cannot cast 6th-level or higher spells. Take this into account when assigning ability scores.
    - Intelligence (INT) for Wizards, Magus, Witch, Alchemist
    - Wisdom (WIS) for Cleric, Druid, Ranger, Inquisitor
    - Charisma (CHA) for Sorcerer, Bard, Paladin, Oracle, Summoner, Cleric's channels/day

# A Note on Munchkining and Table Etiquette
**Munchkining:** I have no concerns with creating optimized characters, but if something is ruining the table environment or the fun of others, a change may be necessary. I do not want to wipe out a character build or make them no longer any fun to play, just want to make the environment the most fun it can be. As long as it does not break the game or cause table strife, I will likely be up for it. Thus if something feels broken, it is likely best to not use it.

**Table Etiquette:**
- Please keep relevant documentation at hand , especially spellcasters. There are decent apps/tools out there for managing spellbooks. Spellcard generators and other tools are available on [d20pfsrd](http://www.d20pfsrd.com/magic/tools) for making physical references. [Pathfinder Spellbook](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ChicaneryGames.PathfindersSpellbook&hl=en) is a decent reference tool on Android, if a bit old (2011).
- Please pay attention. I want to avoid repeating something if possible as well as keep combat moving. In combat, you can always go On Hold and come back in at a later time.
- Ask questions about how a mechanic or such works, especially if it is complex, and we will work through how to make it work. Example: How does this spell and can it do this? Flanking? Movement restrictions?
